Welcome back,
before bringing the course to a close,
we we want to provide a couple of stories,
or short case studies.
That illustrate in a bit more
detail how analytics are applied in
real business problems.
In this video, we'll walk through
a real example of how experiment
driven analytics revealed
some surprising insights
around the phenomenon of customer
churn in the wireless industry.
Let's jump right in,
in the early days of mobile phones,
wireless carriers had a hard
time attracting new customers.
The phone itself is very expensive and the
mass is simply weren't willing to shell
out a hundreds of dollars
upfront to buy it.
Especially, given that the technology
was new and unfamiliar.
To stimulate adoption and
customer acquisition, most carriers
started providing the phones for free.
With the idea that they could recoup their
investment through somewhat higher monthly
service fees.
This presented a high
business risk to the carrier.
If customers didn't stick around for
long enough, they wouldn't recoup the cost
in the free phones and they lose money.
Here's are really simplified view of
what this looks like analytically.
What we're looking at here is the cashflow
diagram for a typical wireless customer.
It shows the net what the customer
pays less the cost incurred by
the carrier by month.
In this example,
we see a large negative cash flow
of about $600 at the beginning of
the relationship in month zero.
This represents the cost
of the free phone.
Then we see a series of small positive
cash flows of about $30 per month
which represent the month we
service fees paid by the customer
less the cost of providing that service.
With this information we can calculate
the cumulative cash flow overtime.
Note that it takes about 20 months for the
cumulative cash flow to become positive.
And a bit longer for the carrier to
actually make a reasonable profit.
This example is a simplified version of
what we do in customer lifetime value
analysis.
We basically look at the total
profitability of an individual customer
over their lifetime by looking
at the actual revenues and
costs associated with that customer.
By doing this type of analysis,
carriers figured out that customers
really needed to stick around for about
two years on average to be profitable.
So the industry converged relatively
quickly on the two-year contract as
a standard business practice.
The strategy worked well for attracting
new customers, but it created a problem.
Historically, mobile phone service
had some of the lowest customer
satisfaction scores across the board.
And it was particularly poor during this
period as carriers struggled with network
quality and coverage gaps.
At the same time, there wasn't much
structure in place for what to do with
existing customers, especially
when initial contracts were over.
So you can imagine what happened,
we have customers with low satisfaction
whose contracts have expired.
They see a competitor who give
them a new phone if they switched.
The result was a very high degree
of customer turnover called Churn
in the industry.
In fact, it wasn't uncommon to
see Churn rates of up to 3% per
month in the customer base,
think about that.
Annualized that's over a third of
the customer base leading per year.
Obviously, carriers start to realize
this was a significant problem.
Especially as the market matured and
there were fewer and fewer people
who are completely new to wireless.
To continue to grow then we need to
figure out how to retain more customers.
The nice thing about the contract is that
it gave a wireless carrier pretty good
idea of about when
the customer might leave.
It is a really simple analysis to show
what true rating by customers looks like.
In fact, we showed this
example in a separate video.
You can see the large spike in churn
rate that occurs right after the 24
month point.
This response to the expiry
of the contract.
This is where a case study really begins.
A particular wireless carrier wanted to
explore how they might incent customers to
stick around longer.
In particular they wanted to see if
they could get customers to renew their
contracts which would lock
in a longer revenue string.
What they didn't know is
how they should do it?
How should they contact customers?
When should they contact customers?
How much incentive will it take to get
the customer to renew their contract?
Should they renew for another two years or
for a shorter period like one year?
Because the contract renewal
effort had never been attempted.
There is no historical data to
analyze to answer these questions.
So a controlled experiment was
designed to test a number of
factors to see what combination
of things would work best.
You would reach out to customers with
some sort of contract renewal campaign.
And test the number of things they thought
might impact how likely customers would be
to renew their contracts.
Specifically, here's what was tested,
three communication
channels were considered.
A bill insert which is basically just
an additional note that's included with
a bill when it comes in the mail.
A stand-alone direct mail piece and
an outbound call to a customer.
The two paper channels were
directed to customer to a 1-800
number to speak with an agent.
Keep in mind this was before we could
reliably use electronic channels like
emails and text messaging.
From a timing perspective,
customers would be contacted two
months before the contract expiry.
One month prior to contract expiry and
just after the contract expired.
Three levels of incentives would
be included, $50, $100 and $150.
Finally, both two renewal and
one renewal options will be tested.
One nice thing about wireless carriers
is that they have a lot of customers.
Most of the major carriers at that
time is between 50 millions and
80 millions customers each.
So it's pretty easy to isolate a large
group of customers who are nearly
contract expiring.
And was possible to run what we called
fully factorial experiment which
basically means that all combinations
of all levels of factors were tested.
In this case that meant that they were
three channels, by three time points,
by three incentive levels, by two contract
types, or 54 total test combinations.
Plus a single control group
that was not contacted at all.
Sample sizes for the group were chosen
using statistical methods to ensure
differences between them could be
detective with high degree and precision.
And the group itself were chosen at
random, because small changes in customer
behaviors tend to have
large financial impacts.
The group sizes were large
about 10,000 in each group.
But even at that size, less than
600,000 subscribers were needed for
the experiment.
To put that in perspective,
it was less than one month's worth
of expiring contract customers.
While the direct marketing aspects of
the experiment were being operationalized,
an analytic plan for
analyzing the results was put in place.
The basic measure they wanted to
know is how many people renew their
contracts, right?
Well, that's true, but for a really robust
analysis, they knew that they needed to
account for unanticipated changes to other
aspects of a customer's behavior as well.
For example, do the customer change their
service plan to something with a different
monthly charge?
Did they change their usage behavior
in any way that would affect
the cost of service to the carrier?
Did they use more or
less customer care resource?
They also knew they needed to consider
both the behavior of customers who did
take an offer to renew a contract, as well
as customers who did not take the offer.
To make sure all
the measures were available,
the analytic plan identified
the right sources of data.
Information from the billing system would
be used to identify the contract status of
a customer.
Whether they had cancelled it or not, and
the actual amount of revenue received.
Information from usage tracking systems
will be use to capture the cost
changes in consumption.
Information from the customer care system
will be use to do the same thing for
changes in calling behavior.
And spreadsheet-based financials
around the marketing campaign itself
will be incorporated the cost of
the contact itself from the incentive.
With the full set of data around customer
behaviors and their financial impacts,
each test group could be compared with
the control group and to each other.
Incremental impact of the contract
renewal after could be calculated and
they could determine what combination
of factors could work best
in a full-scale rollout of the program.
With the planning complete, experimental
campaign was watched in the market.
So, what happened?
Well, before we look at the actual
results, I want to know what you think.
Think about the factors and
levels that were tested in the experiment.
Which combination of factors do you think
produced the most favorable results?
Did the bill insert, standalone direct
mail piece, or outbound call work best for
customer contact?
What's the best time to contact customers
two months before contract expire,
one month before the contract expire or
just after the contract expired?
How large an incentive was required,
$50, or $100 or $150?
Or customers more incline to take
an one year or two year contract?
Take a moment and
think about how you came to your choice.
What considerations or
behaviours led you to pick each item?
This is were things get interesting.
I'm not going to get into the details
of how the calculations worked out or
show you a bunch of charts and
graphs that outline the analysis
because the outcome was really simple.
It turns out that the control
group won every time.
No matter what combination of factors
were applied, the simple act of
reaching out to customers actually
stimulated higher turn rates.
They caused more customers to cancel
by making them an offer to renew
the contract.
A bunch of customers did take the offer
to renew their contracts, but
they apparently are the ones
that were going to stay anyway.
Eventhough we understand a lot more
about customer turn behavior today,
you can imagine how shock the carrier
was at the time to see these results.
The initial reaction was that,
the data had to be wrong or
that the experiment was flawed.
A ton of additional analysis was applied
to revalidate each aspect to the work.
Including retesting some of the same
things which produce the same results.
Additional market research
including focus groups and
customer surveys started to
reveal as really going on.
It turns out that a lot of customers
simply weren't aware of that there
contracts were expiring or just in a low
state of motivation to make a change.
By stimulating that group, they carry
reminded customers about contract and
activated what we call shopping behavior.
When presented in option we tend to
want to know what alternatives are out
there as well.
This means were much more likely
to find a better option and
make a change than we would
be if simply left alone.
In this case, the carrier had
basically kicked the sleeping giant.
Overtime, this carrier and
the wireless industry as a whole,
learned how to better execute
contract renewal efforts.
Much of the improvement was
achieved through experimentation in
the application of more
sophisticated modeling techniques.
First, it was eventually discovered that
customers needed to be contacted well and
advance on their contract expiry dates.
More like six months
versus one to two months,
this avoided shopping behavior since
there was really no option to weave.
And the decision was simply to take
the offer or not take the offer and
wait another six months.
At which point the customer had time
to forget about the contract or
become complacent once again.
Secondly, the offers needed to get richer,
especially when customers were asked
to renew their contracts early.
Eventually the same arms race
dominated new customer acquisition
made its way to customer
retention efforts.
And a phone upgrade became the standard
incentive in contract renewal efforts.
Finally and
most importantly carriers got much better
using predictive analytics to identify
what customers where high risk of turn.
And even which customers in that group
were likely to respond to different
types of offers.
This allowed only high risk
customers to be targeted or
targeted with the richest offers.
There are lot of reasons why I really
like this case than the analytics.
First it really happen,
it's one of the most interesting and
surprising analytic fun except
I experience on my career.
And it underscores the need to
constantly build context and
learn about behaviors that
underpin our analytic efforts.
It's also a great example of
how controlled experimentation
can be used at a large scale to
generate meaningful data for analysis.
And it underscores the importance
of having a control group
looking at a broad set of behaviors
to capture unintended effects.
And examining the impact on both
those that took an offer and
those that did not take an offer.
Finally, it illustrates how a variety of
analytic methods are applied together in
the pursuit of one outcome.
In this case, we saw customer lifetime
value analysis, statistical analysis and
experimental design, campaign analytics,
financial analytics and
predictive and prescriptive analytics.
All applied in an attempt to keep
customers from cancelling their service.
As you encounter problems
in your organization
you may consider how experiments maybe
used in conjunctions with other methods.
To reveal insights, grow your knowledge
in contacts and achieve business results.